Since time immemorial, members of Tataskweyak Cree Nation have been the traditional stewards of the lands and waters. All things are interconnected and deserving of our protection as our relatives. In the north, one of these relatives is namao or known as Lake Sturgeon to settlers. 
[Tataskweyak members have [inherent responsibilities under our inherent laws to protect namao and other living beings in our territory. ] 
[Our way of life, culture, and environment are falling victim to environmental colonialism.] Knowledge holders and land users from Tataskweyak Cree Nation have been engaged in efforts to protect what they believe to be the last remaining namao population on the lower Churchill River and ensure the voice and perspective of the namao is not overwhelmed by the economic interests of Manitoba Hydro.
The Churchill River and Namao
[For TCN, the Churchill River is not only a source of water, but a living entity deeply embedded in our cultural identity, traditional practices and community well-being.] Over generations of living with and on the river, Tataskweyak elders share stories of the namao providing our Nation with good food year round. Other parts of the namao, such as its skin and oil, provided important tools and trade items. 
Sacred stories from Tataskweyak elders refer to namao as grandfathers and grandmothers, demonstrating both the social and spiritual value of namao relations with Tataskweyak. 
Namao populations once thrived along the lakes of the Churchill River. Other relations, such as muskrat and moose, also relied on the Churchill River for food, shelter and transportation. 





Churchill River Diversion
While Manitoba Hydro's operations have altered the nature and extent of Tataskweyak's profound attachment to the lands and waters, they have never severed it. 
[Manitoba Hydro built the Churchill River Diversion (CRD) in the 1970s ]in order to send more water down the Nelson River to power its hydroelectric dams. Up to 95% of the Churchill River's flow has been diverted to the Nelson River system to feed Manitoba's power needs.  
The current licensing and operation of the CRD project has had devasting impacts on namao populations on the Lower Churchill River, and on TCN’s Treaty rights and way of life.
[The flow of the Churchill River is dictated by the power needs of Manitoba Hydro.] This need leaves the Churchill River with more extreme high and low flows, creating cycles of drought punctuated by extreme floods that make it hard for any species, including namao, to survive. 
Since it began operations more than four decades ago, the Churchill River Diversion (CRD) has decreased water flow so much on the Lower Churchill River, only one remnant population of namao exists at the mouth of the Little Churchill River. 
[The entire CRD operates without a proper environmental review] ever being done to understand how this change in flow would impact the Churchill River and the animals and people that rely on it. Manitoba Hydro has already applied for a permanent licence to continue operations past September 2026.
[If action is not taken immediately we run the risk of permanent extinction of namao in the Lower Churchill River.] For too long, the people of southern Manitoba have lived comfortably off benefits provided by the north without understanding the permanent harms being caused.  The north can be forgotten no longer, nor can we stand quiet while our lands and waters are taken advantage of. It is our responsibility as members of Tataskweyak Cree Nation to protect all our relations. 

TCN has Sacrificed to Save Namao
As a result of declines in namao populations, Tataskweyak placed a mortarium on namao harvesting in the mid-2010s. [We took this step as part of our commitment to fulfill our inherent stewardship responsibilities for our lands and waters.] The moratorium has been a significant sacrifice for our community, especially our Elders. Some Elders have gone without enjoying the gift of namao for the last 20 years, when this was once a critical source of food and connection to the land. 
[Tataskweyak has combined traditional and scientific knowledge] to research how the CRD's operations have changed the flow of the Churchill River and impacted the habitat and health of the remaining namao population. The reports support what our Elders, knowledge holders and land users have been saying is true – the CRD's reduced flow has led to the collapse of namao on the Churchill River.  
Our Calls to Action
[Tataskweyak believes strongly] in the importance of meaningful and in-depth consultation before decisions are made that affect our rights. 
[We call on Canada and Manitoba] to take immediate action to honour and protect our Treaty rights, and to ensure the Churchill River Diversion is operated in a way that ensures namao are able to live and thrive on the Churchill River.


Underwater.jpg
